<properties
	pageTitle="Add authentication to your Universal Windows 8.1 app | Microsoft Azure"
	description="Learn how to use Mobile Services to authenticate users of your Universal Windows 8.1 app by using various identity providers, including Google, Facebook, Twitter, and Microsoft."
	services="mobile-services"
	documentationCenter="windows"
	authors="ggailey777"
	manager="erikre"
	editor=""/>

<tags
	ms.service="mobile-services"
	ms.workload="mobile"
	ms.tgt_pltfrm="mobile-windows"
	ms.devlang="dotnet"
	ms.topic="article"
	ms.date="07/21/2016"
	ms.author="glenga"/>

# Add authentication to your Mobile Services app
> [AZURE.SELECTOR-LIST (Platform | Backend )]
- [(iOS | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(iOS | JavaScript)](../articles/mobile-services-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Runtime 8.1 universal C# | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-universal-dotnet-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Runtime 8.1 universal C# | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-javascript-backend-windows-universal-dotnet-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Phone Silverlight 8.x | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-windows-phone-get-started-users.md)
- [(Android | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.iOS | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.iOS | Javascript)](../articles/partner-xamarin-mobile-services-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.Android | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.Android | Javascript)](../articles/partner-xamarin-mobile-services-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(HTML | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-html-get-started-users.md)


&nbsp;

>[AZURE.WARNING] This is an **Azure Mobile Services** topic.  This service has been superseded by Azure App Service Mobile Apps and is scheduled for removal from Azure.  We recommend using Azure Mobile Apps for all new mobile backend deployments.  Read [this announcement](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/transition-of-azure-mobile-services/) to learn more about the pending deprecation of this service.  
> 
> Learn about [migrating your site to Azure App Service](../articles/app-service-mobile/app-service-mobile-migrating-from-mobile-services.md).
>
> Get started with Azure Mobile Apps, see the [Azure Mobile Apps documentation center](https://azure.microsoft.com/documentation/learning-paths/appservice-mobileapps/).
> For the equivalent Mobile Apps version of this topic, see [Add authentication to your Windows app](../app-service-mobile/app-service-mobile-windows-store-dotnet-get-started-users.md).

## Overview

This topic shows you how to authenticate users in Azure Mobile Services from your universal Windows app. In this tutorial, you add authentication to the quickstart project using an identity provider that is supported by Mobile Services. After being successfully authenticated and authorized by Mobile Services, the user ID value is displayed.

This tutorial is based on the Mobile Services quickstart. You must also first complete the tutorial [Get started with Mobile Services] or [Add Mobile Services to an existing app](mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-universal-dotnet-get-started-data.md).

>[AZURE.NOTE]This tutorial shows you how to use server-directed authentication for users in Windows Store and Windows Phone Store 8.1 apps. Fore information about client-directed authentication, see [Logging in with Google, Microsoft and Facebook SDKs to Azure Mobile Services](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/2014/10/27/logging-in-with-google-microsoft-and-facebook-sdks-to-azure-mobile-services/).

##<a name="register"></a>Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services


1. In the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), click **Mobile Services** > your mobile service > **Dashboard**, and make a note of the **Mobile Service URL** value.

2. Register your app with one or more of the following authentication providers:
   * [Google](../articles/mobile-services/mobile-services-how-to-register-google-authentication.md)
   * [Facebook](../articles/mobile-services/mobile-services-how-to-register-facebook-authentication.md)
   * [Twitter](../articles/mobile-services/mobile-services-how-to-register-twitter-authentication.md)
   * [Microsoft](../articles/mobile-services/mobile-services-how-to-register-microsoft-authentication.md)
   * [Azure Active Directory](../articles/mobile-services/mobile-services-how-to-register-active-directory-authentication.md). 
   
    Make a note of the client identity and client secret values generated by the provider. Do not distribute or share the client secret.

3. Back in the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), click **Mobile Services** > your mobile service > **Identity** > your identity provider settings, then enter the client ID and secret value from your provider. 
 
You've now configured both your app and your mobile service to work with your auth provider. You may optionally repeat all these steps for each additional identity provider you'd like to support.

> [AZURE.IMPORTANT] Verify that you've set the correct redirect URI on your identity provider's developer site. As described in the linked instructions for each provider above, the redirect URI may be different for a .NET backend service vs. for a JavaScript backend service. An incorrectly configured redirect URI may result in the login screen not being displayed properly and the app malfunctioning in unexpected ways.


[AZURE.INCLUDE [mobile-services-dotnet-backend-aad-server-extension](../../includes/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-aad-server-extension.md)]

##<a name="permissions"></a>Restrict permissions to authenticated users



By default, all requests to mobile service resources are restricted to clients that present the application key, which does not strictly secure access to resources. To secure your resources, you must restrict access to only authenticated clients.

1. In Visual Studio, open your mobile service project, expand the Controllers folder, and open **TodoItemController.cs**. The **TodoItemController** class implements data access for the TodoItem table. Add the following `using` statement:

		using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Mobile.Service.Security;

2. Apply the following _AuthorizeLevel_ attribute to the **TodoItemController** class. 

		[AuthorizeLevel(AuthorizationLevel.User)]

	This makes sure that all operations against the _TodoItem_ table require an authenticated user. You can also apply the *AuthorizeLevel* attribute at the method level.

3. (Optional) If you wish to debug authentication locally, expand the `App_Start` folder, open **WebApiConfig.cs**, and add the following code to the **Register** method.  

		config.SetIsHosted(true);

	This tells the local mobile service project to run as if it is being hosted in Azure, including honoring the *AuthorizeLevel* settings. Without this setting, all HTTP requests to localhost are permitted without authentication despite the *AuthorizeLevel* setting. When you enable self-hosted mode, you also need to set a value for the local application key.

4. (Optional) In the web.config project file, set a string value for the `MS_ApplicationKey` app setting. 

	This is the password that you use (with no username) to test the API help pages when you run the service locally.  This string value is not used by the live site in Azure, and you do not need to use the actual application key; any valid string value will work.
 
4. Republish your project.

&nbsp;&nbsp;6. In Visual Studio, right-click the Windows Store project for the TodoList app and click **Set as StartUp Project**.

&nbsp;&nbsp;7. In the shared project, open the App.xaml.cs project file, locate the definition for the [MobileServiceClient](http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/azure/microsoft.windowsazure.mobileservices.mobileserviceclient.aspx), and make sure that it is configured to connect to the mobile service running in Azure.

>[AZURE.NOTE]When you use Visual Studio tools to connect your app to a Mobile Service, the tool generate two sets of **MobileServiceClient** definitions, one for each client platform. This is a good time to simplify the generated code by unifying the `#if...#endif` wrapped **MobileServiceClient** definitions into a single unwrapped definition used by both versions of the app. You won't need to do this when you downloaded the quickstart app from the [Azure classic portal].

&nbsp;&nbsp;8. Press the F5 key to run the Windows store app, and verify that an unhandled exception with a status code of 401 (Unauthorized) is raised after the app starts.

&nbsp;&nbsp;This happens because the app attempts to access Mobile Services as an unauthenticated user, but the *TodoItem* table now requires authentication.

Next, you will update the app to authenticate users before requesting resources from the mobile service.

##<a name="add-authentication"></a>Add authentication to the app

[AZURE.INCLUDE [mobile-windows-universal-dotnet-authenticate-app](../../includes/mobile-windows-universal-dotnet-authenticate-app.md)]

>[AZURE.NOTE]If you registered your Windows Store app package information with Mobile Services, you should call the <a href="http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkId=311594" target="_blank">LoginAsync</a> method by supplying a value of **true** for the *useSingleSignOn* parameter. If you do not do this, your users will continue to be presented with a login prompt every time that the login method is called.

##<a name="tokens"></a>Store the authorization tokens on the client

The previous example showed a standard sign-in, which requires the client to contact both the identity provider and the mobile service every time that the app starts. Not only is this method inefficient, you can run into usage-related issues should many customers try to start your app at the same time. A better approach is to cache the authorization token returned by Mobile Services and try to use this first before using a provider-based sign-in.

>[AZURE.NOTE]You can cache the token issued by Mobile Services regardless of whether you are using client-managed or service-managed authentication. This tutorial uses service-managed authentication.

[AZURE.INCLUDE [mobile-windows-universal-dotnet-authenticate-app-with-token](../../includes/mobile-windows-universal-dotnet-authenticate-app-with-token.md)]


## <a name="next-steps"> </a>Next steps

In the next tutorial, [Service-side authorization of Mobile Services users][Authorize users with scripts], you will take the user ID value provided by Mobile Services based on an authenticated user and use it to filter the data returned by Mobile Services.

##See also

+ [Enhanced users feature](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/2014/10/02/custom-login-scopes-single-sign-on-new-asp-net-web-api-updates-to-the-azure-mobile-services-net-backend/)<br/>
You can get additional user data maintained by the identity provider in your mobile service by by calling the **ServiceUser.GetIdentitiesAsync()** method in a .NET backend.

+ [Mobile Services .NET How-to Conceptual Reference]<br/>Learn more about how to use Mobile Services with a .NET client.


<!-- Anchors. -->
[Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services]: #register
[Restrict table permissions to authenticated users]: #permissions
[Add authentication to the app]: #add-authentication
[Store authentication tokens on the client]: #tokens
[Next Steps]:#next-steps


<!-- URLs. -->
[Submit an app page]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkID=266582
[My Applications]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkId=262039
[Live SDK for Windows]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkId=262253
[Get started with Mobile Services]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-dotnet-get-started.md
[Get started with data]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-dotnet-get-started-data.md
[Get started with authentication]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-dotnet-get-started-users.md
[Get started with push notifications]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-dotnet-get-started-push.md
[Authorize users with scripts]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-service-side-authorization.md
[JavaScript and HTML]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-javascript-get-started-users.md

[Azure classic portal]: https://manage.windowsazure.com/
[Mobile Services .NET How-to Conceptual Reference]: mobile-services-windows-dotnet-how-to-use-client-library.md
[Register your Windows Store app package for Microsoft authentication]: mobile-services-how-to-register-store-app-package-microsoft-authentication.md

