<properties
	pageTitle="Get started with authentication (Windows Phone) | Microsoft Azure"
	description="Learn how to use Mobile Services to authenticate users of your Windows Phone app through a variety of identity providers, including Google, Facebook, Twitter, and Microsoft."
	services="mobile-services"
	documentationCenter="windows"
	authors="ggailey777"
	manager="dwrede"
	editor=""/>

<tags
	ms.service="mobile-services"
	ms.workload="mobile"
	ms.tgt_pltfrm="mobile-windows-phone"
	ms.devlang="dotnet"
	ms.topic="article"
	ms.date="07/21/2016"
	ms.author="glenga"/>

# Add authentication to your Mobile Services app

>[AZURE.WARNING] This is an **Azure Mobile Services** topic.  This service has been superseded by Azure App Service Mobile Apps and is scheduled for removal from Azure.  We recommend using Azure Mobile Apps for all new mobile backend deployments.  Read [this announcement](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/transition-of-azure-mobile-services/) to learn more about the pending deprecation of this service.  
>
> Learn about [migrating your site to Azure App Service](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/documentation/articles/app-service-mobile-migrating-from-mobile-services/).
>
> Get started with Azure Mobile Apps, see the [Azure Mobile Apps documentation center](https://azure.microsoft.com/documentation/learning-paths/appservice-mobileapps/).

&nbsp;


> [AZURE.SELECTOR-LIST (Platform | Backend )]
- [(iOS | .NET)](mobile-services-dotnet-backend-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(iOS | JavaScript)](mobile-services-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows 8.x Store C# | .NET)](mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-dotnet-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows 8.x Store C# | Javascript)](mobile-services-windows-store-dotnet-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Phone Silverlight 8.x | Javascript)](mobile-services-windows-phone-get-started-users.md)
- [(Android | Javascript)](mobile-services-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.iOS | .NET)](mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.iOS | Javascript)](partner-xamarin-mobile-services-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.Android | .NET)](mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.Android | Javascript)](partner-xamarin-mobile-services-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(HTML | Javascript)](mobile-services-html-get-started-users.md)

## Overview

This topic shows you how to authenticate users in Azure Mobile Services from your app. In this tutorial, you add authentication to the quickstart project using an identity provider that is supported by Mobile Services. After being successfully authenticated and authorized by Mobile Services, the user ID value is displayed.

This tutorial is also demonstrated by Nick Harris in the following video:

> [AZURE.VIDEO mobile-authorize-users-in-scripts-windows-phone]

This tutorial is based on the Mobile Services quickstart. You must also first complete the tutorial [Add Mobile Services to an existing app].

>[AZURE.NOTE]This tutorial demonstrates the authentication flow managed by Mobile Services using a variety of identity providers. This method is easy to configure and supports multiple providers. By using client-managed authentication, your app has access to additional user data maintained by the identity provider. You can get the same user data in your mobile service by by calling the **user.getIdentities()** function in server scripts. For more information, see [this post](http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkId=506605).

## <a name="register"></a>Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services


1. In the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), click **Mobile Services** > your mobile service > **Dashboard**, and make a note of the **Mobile Service URL** value.

2. Register your app with one or more of the following authentication providers:
   * [Google](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-google-authentication.md)
   * [Facebook](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-facebook-authentication.md)
   * [Twitter](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-twitter-authentication.md)
   * [Microsoft](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-microsoft-authentication.md)
   * [Azure Active Directory](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-active-directory-authentication.md).

    Make a note of the client identity and client secret values generated by the provider. Do not distribute or share the client secret.

3. Back in the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), click **Mobile Services** > your mobile service > **Identity** > your identity provider settings, then enter the client ID and secret value from your provider.

You've now configured both your app and your mobile service to work with your auth provider. You may optionally repeat all these steps for each additional identity provider you'd like to support.

> [AZURE.IMPORTANT] Verify that you've set the correct redirect URI on your identity provider's developer site. As described in the linked instructions for each provider above, the redirect URI may be different for a .NET backend service vs. for a JavaScript backend service. An incorrectly configured redirect URI may result in the login screen not being displayed properly and the app malfunctioning in unexpected ways.


## <a name="permissions"></a>Restrict permissions to authenticated users


To secure your endpoints, you must restrict access to only authenticated clients.

1. In the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), navigate to your mobile service, then click  **Data** > your table name (**TodoItem**) > **Permissions**.

2. Set all of the table operation permissions to **Only authenticated users**.

	 This ensures that all operations against the table require an authenticated user, which is required for this tutorial. You can set different permissions on each operations to support your specific scenario.  


&nbsp;&nbsp;3. In Visual Studio, open the project that you created when you completed the tutorial [Add Mobile Services to an existing app](mobile-services-windows-phone-get-started-data.md).

&nbsp;&nbsp;4. Press the F5 key to run this quickstart-based app; verify that an unhandled exception with a status code of 401 (Unauthorized) is raised after the app starts. This happens because the app attempts to access Mobile Services as an unauthenticated user, but the *TodoItem* table now requires authentication.

Next, you will update the app to authenticate users before requesting resources from the mobile service.

## <a name="add-authentication"></a>Add authentication to the app

1. Open the project file mainpage.xaml.cs and add the following code snippet to the MainPage class:

        private MobileServiceUser user;
        private async Task Authenticate()
        {
            while (user == null)
            {
                string message;
                try
                {
                    user = await App.MobileServiceDotNetClient.LoginAsync(MobileServiceAuthenticationProvider.Twitter);
                    message = string.Format("You are now logged in - {0}", user.UserId);
                }
                catch (InvalidOperationException)
                {
                    message = "You must log in. Login Required";
                }

                var dialog = new MessageDialog(message);
                await dialog.ShowAsync();
            }
        }

    This creates a member variable for storing the current user and a method to handle the authentication process. The user is authenticated by using a Twitter login.

    >[AZURE.NOTE]If you are using an identity provider other than Twitter, change the value of <strong>MobileServiceAuthenticationProvider</strong> above to the value for your provider.</p>
    </div>

2. Delete or comment-out the existing **OnNavigatedTo** method override and replace it with the following method that handles the **Loaded** event for the page.

        async void MainPage_Loaded(object sender, RoutedEventArgs e)
        {
            await Authenticate();
            RefreshTodoItems();
        }

   	This method calls the new **Authenticate** method.

3. Replace the MainPage constructor with the following code:

        // Constructor
        public MainPage()
        {
            InitializeComponent();
            this.Loaded += MainPage_Loaded;
        }

   	This constructor also registers the handler for the Loaded event.

4. Press the F5 key to run the app and sign into the app with your chosen identity provider.

   	When you are successfully logged-in, the app should run without errors, and you should be able to query Mobile Services and make updates to data.

## <a name="tokens"></a>Store the authorization tokens on the client


The previous example showed a standard sign-in, which requires the client to contact both the identity provider and the mobile service every time that the app starts. Not only is this method inefficient, you can run into usage-relates issues should many customers try to start you app at the same time. A better approach is to cache the authorization token returned by Mobile Services and try to use this first before using a provider-based sign-in.

>[AZURE.NOTE]You can cache the token issued by Mobile Services regardless of whether you are using client-managed or service-managed authentication. This tutorial uses service-managed authentication.

1. In the MainPage.xaml.cs project file, add the following **using** statements:

		using System.IO.IsolatedStorage;
		using System.Security.Cryptography;		

2. Replace the **AuthenticateAsync** method with the following code:

        private async System.Threading.Tasks.Task AuthenticateAsync()
        {
            string message;
            // This sample uses the Facebook provider.
            var provider = "Facebook";

            // Provide some additional app-specific security for the encryption.
            byte [] entropy = { 1, 8, 3, 6, 5 };

            // Authorization credential.
            MobileServiceUser user = null;

            // Isolated storage for the app.
            IsolatedStorageSettings settings =
                IsolatedStorageSettings.ApplicationSettings;

            while (user == null)
            {
                // Try to get an existing encrypted credential from isolated storage.                    
                if (settings.Contains(provider))
                {
                    // Get the encrypted byte array, decrypt and deserialize the user.
                    var encryptedUser = settings[provider] as byte[];
                    var userBytes = ProtectedData.Unprotect(encryptedUser, entropy);
                    user = JsonConvert.DeserializeObject<MobileServiceUser>(
                        System.Text.Encoding.Unicode.GetString(userBytes, 0, userBytes.Length));
                }
                if (user != null)
                {
                    // Set the user from the stored credentials.
                    App.MobileService.CurrentUser = user;

                    try
                    {
                        // Try to return an item now to determine if the cached credential has expired.
                        await App.MobileService.GetTable<TodoItem>().Take(1).ToListAsync();
                    }
                    catch (MobileServiceInvalidOperationException ex)
                    {
                        if (ex.Response.StatusCode == System.Net.HttpStatusCode.Unauthorized)
                        {
                            // Remove the credential with the expired token.
                            settings.Remove(provider);
                            user = null;
                            continue;
                        }
                    }
                }
                else
                {
                    try
                    {
                        // Login with the identity provider.
                        user = await App.MobileService
                            .LoginAsync(provider);

                        // Serialize the user into an array of bytes and encrypt with DPAPI.
                        var userBytes = System.Text.Encoding.Unicode
                            .GetBytes(JsonConvert.SerializeObject(user));
                        byte[] encryptedUser = ProtectedData.Protect(userBytes, entropy);

                        // Store the encrypted user credentials in local settings.
                        settings.Add(provider, encryptedUser);
                        settings.Save();
                    }
                    catch (MobileServiceInvalidOperationException ex)
                    {
                        message = "You must log in. Login Required";
                    }
                }
                message = string.Format("You are now logged in - {0}", user.UserId);
                MessageBox.Show(message);
            }
        }

	In this version of **AuthenticateAsync**, the app tries to use credentials stored encrypted in local storage to access the mobile service. A simple query is sent to verify that the stored token is not expired. When a 401 is returned, a regular provider-based sign-in is attempted. A regular sign-in is also performed when there is no stored credential.

	>[AZURE.NOTE]This app tests for expired tokens during login, but token expiration can occur after authentication when the app is in use. For a solution to handling authorization errors related to expiring tokens, see the post [Caching and handling expired tokens in Azure Mobile Services managed SDK](http://blogs.msdn.com/b/carlosfigueira/archive/2014/03/13/caching-and-handling-expired-tokens-in-azure-mobile-services-managed-sdk.aspx).

3. Restart the app twice.

	Notice that on the first start-up, sign-in with the provider is again required. However, on the second restart the cached credentials are used and sign-in is bypassed.

## <a name="next-steps"> </a>Next steps

In the next tutorial, [Service-side authorization of Mobile Services users](mobile-services-javascript-backend-service-side-authorization.md), you will take the user ID value provided by Mobile Services based on an authenticated user and use it to filter the data returned by Mobile Services.

<!-- Anchors. -->
[Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services]: #register
[Restrict table permissions to authenticated users]: #permissions
[Add authentication to the app]: #add-authentication
[Next Steps]:#next-steps

<!-- Images. -->
[1]: ./media/mobile-services-wp8-get-started-users/mobile-services-selection.png
[2]: ./media/mobile-services-wp8-get-started-users/mobile-service-uri.png
[3]: ./media/mobile-services-wp8-get-started-users/mobile-identity-tab.png
[4]: ./media/mobile-services-wp8-get-started-users/mobile-portal-data-tables.png
[5]: ./media/mobile-services-wp8-get-started-users/mobile-portal-change-table-perms.png

<!-- URLs. -->
[Submit an app page]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkID=266582
[Add Mobile Services to an existing app]: mobile-services-windows-phone-get-started-data.md
[Authorize users with scripts]: mobile-services-windows-phone-authorize-users-in-scripts.md
