<properties
	pageTitle="Get Started with authentication in Mobile Services for Xamarin iOS apps | Microsoft Azure"
	description="Learn how to use Mobile Services to authenticate users of your Xamarin iOS app through a variety of identity providers, including Google, Facebook, Twitter, and Microsoft."
	services="mobile-services"
	documentationCenter="xamarin"
	authors="lindydonna"
	manager="dwrede"
	editor=""/>

<tags
	ms.service="mobile-services"
	ms.workload="mobile"
	ms.tgt_pltfrm="mobile-xamarin-ios"
	ms.devlang="dotnet"
	ms.topic="article"
	ms.date="07/21/2016" 
	ms.author="donnam"/>

# Add authentication to your Mobile Services app

> [AZURE.SELECTOR-LIST (Platform | Backend )]
- [(iOS | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(iOS | JavaScript)](../articles/mobile-services-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Runtime 8.1 universal C# | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-universal-dotnet-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Runtime 8.1 universal C# | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-javascript-backend-windows-universal-dotnet-get-started-users.md)
- [(Windows Phone Silverlight 8.x | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-windows-phone-get-started-users.md)
- [(Android | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.iOS | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.iOS | Javascript)](../articles/partner-xamarin-mobile-services-ios-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.Android | .NET)](../articles/mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(Xamarin.Android | Javascript)](../articles/partner-xamarin-mobile-services-android-get-started-users.md)
- [(HTML | Javascript)](../articles/mobile-services-html-get-started-users.md)


&nbsp;

>[AZURE.WARNING] This is an **Azure Mobile Services** topic.  This service has been superseded by Azure App Service Mobile Apps and is scheduled for removal from Azure.  We recommend using Azure Mobile Apps for all new mobile backend deployments.  Read [this announcement](https://azure.microsoft.com/blog/transition-of-azure-mobile-services/) to learn more about the pending deprecation of this service.  
> 
> Learn about [migrating your site to Azure App Service](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/documentation/articles/app-service-mobile-migrating-from-mobile-services/).
>
> Get started with Azure Mobile Apps, see the [Azure Mobile Apps documentation center](https://azure.microsoft.com/documentation/learning-paths/appservice-mobileapps/).
> For the equivalent Mobile Apps version of this topic, see [Add authentication to your Xamarin.iOS app](../app-service-mobile/app-service-mobile-xamarin-ios-get-started-users.md).

This topic shows you how to authenticate users in Mobile Services from your app. In this tutorial, you add authentication to the quickstart project using an identity provider that is supported by Mobile Services. After being successfully authenticated and authorized by Mobile Services, the user ID value is displayed.

This tutorial walks you through these basic steps to enable authentication in your app:

1. [Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services]
2. [Restrict table permissions to authenticated users]
3. [Add authentication to the app]

This tutorial is based on the Mobile Services quickstart. You must also first complete the tutorial [Get started with Mobile Services].

##<a name="register"></a>Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services


1. In the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), click **Mobile Services** > your mobile service > **Dashboard**, and make a note of the **Mobile Service URL** value.

2. Register your app with one or more of the following authentication providers:
   * [Google](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-google-authentication.md)
   * [Facebook](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-facebook-authentication.md)
   * [Twitter](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-twitter-authentication.md)
   * [Microsoft](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-microsoft-authentication.md)
   * [Azure Active Directory](./
mobile-services-how-to-register-active-directory-authentication.md). 
   
    Make a note of the client identity and client secret values generated by the provider. Do not distribute or share the client secret.

3. Back in the [Azure classic portal](https://manage.windowsazure.com/), click **Mobile Services** > your mobile service > **Identity** > your identity provider settings, then enter the client ID and secret value from your provider. 
 
You've now configured both your app and your mobile service to work with your auth provider. You may optionally repeat all these steps for each additional identity provider you'd like to support.

> [AZURE.IMPORTANT] Verify that you've set the correct redirect URI on your identity provider's developer site. As described in the linked instructions for each provider above, the redirect URI may be different for a .NET backend service vs. for a JavaScript backend service. An incorrectly configured redirect URI may result in the login screen not being displayed properly and the app malfunctioning in unexpected ways.


### (Optional) Configure your .NET Mobile Service for Azure Active Directory

>[AZURE.NOTE] These steps are optional because they only apply to the Azure Active Directory login provider.

1. Install the [WindowsAzure.MobileServices.Backend.Security NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/WindowsAzure.MobileServices.Backend.Security).

2. In Visual Studio expand App_Start and open WebApiConfig.cs. Add the following `using` statement at the top:

        using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Mobile.Service.Security.Providers;

3. Also in WebApiConfig.cs, add the following code to the `Register` method, immediately after `options` is instantiated:

        options.LoginProviders.Remove(typeof(AzureActiveDirectoryLoginProvider));
        options.LoginProviders.Add(typeof(AzureActiveDirectoryExtendedLoginProvider));

##<a name="permissions"></a>Restrict permissions to authenticated users



By default, all requests to mobile service resources are restricted to clients that present the application key, which does not strictly secure access to resources. To secure your resources, you must restrict access to only authenticated clients.

1. In Visual Studio, open your mobile service project, expand the Controllers folder, and open **TodoItemController.cs**. The **TodoItemController** class implements data access for the TodoItem table. Add the following `using` statement:

		using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Mobile.Service.Security;

2. Apply the following _AuthorizeLevel_ attribute to the **TodoItemController** class. 

		[AuthorizeLevel(AuthorizationLevel.User)]

	This makes sure that all operations against the _TodoItem_ table require an authenticated user. You can also apply the *AuthorizeLevel* attribute at the method level.

3. (Optional) If you wish to debug authentication locally, expand the `App_Start` folder, open **WebApiConfig.cs**, and add the following code to the **Register** method.  

		config.SetIsHosted(true);

	This tells the local mobile service project to run as if it is being hosted in Azure, including honoring the *AuthorizeLevel* settings. Without this setting, all HTTP requests to localhost are permitted without authentication despite the *AuthorizeLevel* setting. When you enable self-hosted mode, you also need to set a value for the local application key.

4. (Optional) In the web.config project file, set a string value for the `MS_ApplicationKey` app setting. 

	This is the password that you use (with no username) to test the API help pages when you run the service locally.  This string value is not used by the live site in Azure, and you do not need to use the actual application key; any valid string value will work.
 
4. Republish your project.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;6. In Visual Studio or Xamarin Studio, run the client project on a device or simulator. Verify that an unhandled exception with a status code of 401 (Unauthorized) is raised after the app starts.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This happens because the app attempts to access Mobile Services as an unauthenticated user, but the *TodoItem* table now requires authentication.

Next, you will update the app to authenticate users before requesting resources from the mobile service.

##<a name="add-authentication"></a>Add authentication to the app

In this section, you will modify the app to display a login screen before displaying data. When the app starts, it will not connect to your mobile service and will not display any data. After the first time that the user performs the refresh gesture, the login screen will appear; after successful login the list of todo items will be displayed.

1. In the client project, open the file **QSTodoService.cs** and add the following declarations to QSTodoService:

		// Mobile Service logged in user
		private MobileServiceUser user;
		public MobileServiceUser User { get { return user; } }

2. Add a new method **Authenticate** to **QSTodoService** with the following definition:

        private async Task Authenticate(UIViewController view)
        {
            try
            {
                user = await client.LoginAsync(view, MobileServiceAuthenticationProvider.Facebook);
            }
            catch (Exception ex)
            {
                Console.Error.WriteLine (@"ERROR - AUTHENTICATION FAILED {0}", ex.Message);
            }
        }

	> [AZURE.NOTE] When you use an identity provider other than a Facebook, change the value passed to **LoginAsync** above to one of the following: _MicrosoftAccount_, _Twitter_, _Google_, or _WindowsAzureActiveDirectory_.

3. Open **QSTodoListViewController.cs** and modify the method definition of **ViewDidLoad** to remove or comment-out the call to **RefreshAsync()** near the end.

4. Add the following code at the top of the **RefreshAsync** method definition:

		// Add at the start of the RefreshAsync method.
		if (todoService.User == null) {
			await QSTodoService.DefaultService.Authenticate (this);
			if (todoService.User == null) {
				Console.WriteLine ("You must sign in.");
				return;
			}
		}
		
	This displays a sign-in screen to attempt authentication when the **User** property is null. When the login is successful the **User** is set. 

5. Press the **Run** button to build the project and start the app in the iPhone simulator. Verify that the app displays no data. **RefreshAsync()** has not yet been called.

6. Perform the refresh gesture by pulling down the list of items, which calls **RefreshAsync()**. This calls **Authenticate()** to start authentication and the login screen is displayed. After you have successfully authenticated, the app displays the list of todo items and you can make updates to the data.

## <a name="next-steps"> </a>Next steps

In the next tutorial, [Service-side authorization of Mobile Services users][Authorize users with scripts], you will take the user ID value provided by Mobile Services based on an authenticated user and use it to filter the data returned by Mobile Services.


<!-- Anchors. -->
[Register your app for authentication and configure Mobile Services]: #register
[Restrict table permissions to authenticated users]: #permissions
[Add authentication to the app]: #add-authentication
[Next Steps]:#next-steps


<!-- URLs. -->
[Submit an app page]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkID=266582
[My Applications]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkId=262039
[Live SDK for Windows]: http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/p/?LinkId=262253
[Get started with Mobile Services]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-ios-get-started.md
[Get started with authentication]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-ios-get-started-users.md
[Get started with push notifications]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-xamarin-ios-get-started-push.md
[Authorize users with scripts]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-service-side-authorization.md
[JavaScript and HTML]: mobile-services-dotnet-backend-windows-store-javascript-get-started-users.md
